three two one and we're live how are you
sir hey I'm great thanks for being here
man I really appreciate it it is the
coolest thing I've done really ever I
watched your TED talk on what was the
word that used Lester land
Lester yeah and it felt hopeless like
for people who don't know what I'm
talking about could you just give like a
brief synopsis of the way you were
describing how complete completely
rigged our election system is and and
what what it actually takes to be
elected and how much of the time they
spend is involved in raising money and
why yes so we've got a system where we
have a money primary and then we have a
regular election and in the money
primary to compete you gotta raise tons
of money to be able to fund your
campaign and when you raise that money
you raise it from a tiny tiny fraction
of the 1% so unless in the in the TED
talk about Lester no I said you know
imagine a place called Lester land where
basically it's the Lester's who rule and
by the Lester's I mean the same
proportion of people named Lester as in
the United States right now so there's
about a hundred and fifty thousand
Americans named Lester I'm one of them
but here we are
the Lester's so imagine a world ruled by
Lester land because that's essentially
the world we have because of the way we
fund our campaigns because there's about
a hundred and fifty thousand men who
give even just the maximum contribution
to one political candidate if you ask
who the number of people who give the
maximum contribution over the course of
a campaign meaning in the primary in the
general election it's about twenty-two
thousand Americans in 2014 who gave them
maximum contribution to one political
campaign so what that means is it's a
tiny tiny fraction who are the most
important funders of political campaigns
and candidates for Congress and members
of Congress spent thirty to seventy
their time sucking up to this tiny tiny
fraction and so is it any surprise that
you see Congress bending over backwards
to keep those guys happy because they
know without those people they don't
have a shot at getting back into
Congress and the way you were describing
it as when you're saying it as
lesterland
it was like imagine if we were this
screwed up that was essentially what
you're saying yeah but we're more
screwed up than is lesterland yeah that
was a disturbing video because I was
realized it was emerging as you were
speaking I was like wait a minute is it
that bad
yeah you know it's I actually since that
video I've come to think it's even worse
so guys a clarence land well it could be
worse because it's even smaller number
and if you look at the number of super
PAC donors you know the really critical
super PAC down about a hundred people
who gave more than half of the super PAC
money in the last presidential election
you know a hundred you know so this is a
really tiny tiny number but what this
tiny number represents in the way we
fund campaigns is the extraordinary
inequality on that dimension right but
since since I was focused on the money
I've you know more recently but start
thinking about the other screwed up
dimensions so think about gerrymandering
you know we gerrymander districts in
America so that about 85 percent of the
House seats in the United States
Congress our safe seats which means if
you're a Republican in a safe seat
democratic district your views just
never matter to the Congress person
because that vote of a Republican will
never determine who's in Congress or a
Democrat and safe seat Republican
district that's that's the same okay but
that doesn't mean those Congress people
are not afraid about re-election of
course they are afraid about whether
they'll be reelected but they're afraid
not of a Democrat running against a
Republican they're afraid of an even
more extreme Republican running against
the incumbent Republican so what those
incumbents in those safe seat districts
do is they obsess about what the
extremists in their own party
cares about so the extremists on the
left and the right have this ability to
leverage extraordinary influence inside
of the House of Representatives simply
because we've decided to gerrymander
these districts to create these safe
seats so those extremists are a kind of
Lester's too there are more of them you
know it's more democratic than
lesterland
but they too have enormous influence
over ordinary people and most ordinary
people's views then to these Congress
people just don't matter that feels
hopeless for a dummy like me sitting on
the outside looking at this and like God
if this is this deeply entrenched with I
mean I guess it's not technically
corruption because it's all legal but
it's an entanglement with money and with
influence that that I mean how do you
unwind this yeah so that point is really
critical it's not technically illegal
hmm and what that means is the people
are engaged in this are not doing wrong
things they're just playing by the rules
right they're playing with the system
it's just that the system has become
corrupted when did it start well I think
that the moment the United States
Congress begins to fall apart in a
really dramatic and interesting way is
when Newt Gingrich becomes Speaker of
the House so when the Republicans take
control of Congress in 95 it's the first
time the Republicans have taken control
of the House of Representatives in 40
years so the house becomes incredibly
competitive each election you know is up
for grabs who's going to control the
house so Gingrich turns his members in
the house into perpetual fundraisers
it's basically we got to raise the money
to defend ourselves the next time around
and then the Democrats followed suit so
the Democrats turned their members into
perpetual fundraisers and they changed
the rules about like who gets to be
chairmen of committees it's no longer
like who's the person with the most
experience or the most insight
increasingly becomes who raises the most
money and the democratic party I know
about the Democratic Party the
Republicans don't talk to me much but
the Democratic Party increasingly
changes its focus from what are the
policies that our members care about -
what are we going to do to make sure
that you as a member meet your
fundraising target and so from 95 until
today the institution becomes an
institution focused on the game of
getting reelected
I'm Jim Cooper a Democrat from Tennessee
who went to Congress first in like 1983
so he's been there for a long time
Cooper says Capitol Hill has become a
kind of farm League for K Street okay so
what do you mean by that is members go
there they learn how to raise money they
become focused obsessively on raising
money but one of the things that they're
really focused on it's how do they go
from Capitol Hill to becoming a lobbyist
because that's where the real money is
you know a member of Congress gets paid
about as much as the students I ate at
the Harvard Law School in their first
year as lawyers you know so to ordinary
Americans it's a lot of money but two
people on Capitol Hill doesn't seem like
a lot of money but then they go and
become a lobbyist they can make ten
times that as a lobbyist and so what
Cooper says is you have this institution
which has become so focused on the money
that it's it's just institution for
producing influence that can be sold and
first the congressmen are basically
sucking up to the people who want to buy
influence and then the congressmen
become the people buying influence
themselves because they're working as
lobbyists for these important interests
so they're in the rigged game they
understand how it gets rigged and then
they work to rig it yeah yeah they could
they see this is their business their
honeypot yeah and there's whatever the
district is outside of Washington DC in
Virginia where there's some ungodly
number of wealthy people per capita
where there's more there's more
lobbyists in that area than anywhere
else in the United States right and
that's this is a giant collection of
wealth right Washington DC is an
incredibly prosperous place and anybody
who's been there um you know for a long
who've seen it for a long time like I I
clerked there in the early 1990s and it
was a pretty grungy place but it's a
really opulent City now it's like the
golden city on the hill you know the Oz
and the reason for that is
the extraordinary amount of money that's
been poured into that district for the
purpose of buying influence to buy
legislation that makes it so these
incumbent dinosaur corporations that
have protected themselves against
competition across the country can
continue to profit it's a weird place
though because even though it's
incredibly wealthy it's also incredibly
Pullen there's a vast difference yeah
the the spectrum is really wide because
I mean that was one in the 90s was that
that's the Marion Barry time right yeah
so this one I mean he won as mayor again
when he came back after being arrested
for smoking crack yeah
and people like whatever yeah a little
crack yeah it's it was an ugly place
then it's becoming you know grotesque
place now from the from the standpoint
of the principles of what America is
supposed to be yeah
because the privilege there are not
people who are privileged because they
have you know Elon Musk like invented a
great new product or they've worked
incredibly hard in a competitive
marketplace and succeeded their
privilege because they've leveraged
influence in a corrupt system to to
profit and the people who are failing
they're you know a lot of reasons
they're failing is just we don't have a
competitive powerful economy that gives
them any opportunities right now because
that that district Washington DC because
it's got no effective representation is
one of the worst represented districts
in the country so essentially this all
started out with Newt Gingrich's group
and they decided to spend so much time
concentrating on fund raising and then
once that became successful everyone
else followed suit yeah yeah so the game
became no longer how do we legislate for
America but how do we rally our troops
to raise the money we need to win in the
next election the game is just about the
election I mean you know my mother lives
in in Hilton Head which is of course a
very Republican district but they
elected their first Democrat Joe
Cunningham and Joe my mother loved him
and wanted to support him my mother's a
Republican but here he was she wanted to
support a Democrat so I said I check for
on her behalf - this Democrat the day he
was elected
he started raising money for the next
election his whole focus from that
moment on and now he started a big
membership organization where they can
get members to sort of help him sort of
get back to Congress the next time
around their sole focus is the elections
and this is really different in the
1980s you know they would go to
Washington for 18 months they would do
the work of governing and then for six
months they do the work of politicking
so you know to a year and a half they
could figure out how to solve the
problems of America and then for a half
a year they figured out how to get
reelected that's no longer the game the
game now is from day one how do we raise
the funds we need to make sure we can
get reelected and with the Democrats
extraordinary turnaround in this last
election you can be damn sure that's
exactly the obsessive focus that will be
going into 2020 and if there's no other
viable alternative this is a game that
they have to play yeah
good people have to play it this is the
point it's not like you can have the
good people who say I'm not gonna play
this game I mean there are some famous
people who could say I'm not gonna play
this game you know Alexandria okay Joe
Cortez I mean she doesn't have to raise
money I'm sure and people on the right -
you know who are the famous people all
right they don't have to worry about
this but the ordinary Congress person
knows given the way the system is right
now they've got to obsessively focus on
how to raise money you know what they
not but that means is they develop a
sixth sense a constant awareness about
how what they do will affect their
ability to raise money become in the
words of the x-files shapeshifters as
they constantly adjust their views in
light of what they know will help them
to raise money there's a congressman
Leslie Byrne Democrat from Virginia who
describes that when she went to Congress
she was told by a colleague quote always
lean to the green than to clarify she
went on you know he was not an
environmentalist so the point is like
you know in your heart of hearts which
way you got to go to make sure and if
you're good and you're smart you'd never
say anything to indicate it but it's
operating but sometimes you're not so
smart so in the tax bill the leading up
to the passage of the last tax cut you
know the one point six trillion dollar
gift to corporations and
Elfi people primarily a congressman New
York stood on the floor of the house and
said you know my donors have told me
that if we don't deliver on this
I should never call him again I should
never call them again so it's basically
you know as simple and clear as possible
you don't reduce our taxes don't ever
ask us for more money and and that's the
reality of what Washington has become
now once this gets started and it moves
in this direction we don't have a long
history of this to understand the the
waves and the ins and the outs of the
tide it just this is what it is and it
keeps moving in the same general
direction how would at that ever stop
how would there ever be some sort of
reform that puts this back into a
position where it makes sense and it's
tenable yeah so you know I've been in
this business for about 12 years now in
the business of like trying to figure
out what can we do yeah to reform this
corrupted system and you know part of me
feels as you said like it's hopeless but
part of me feels like it's the most
hopeful moment we've seen because like a
decade ago when I would go around and
say you know we got this really
corrupted system and like money is
really people say no when are you
talking about no we just have to focus
on getting the people we want elected
and if we get the people we want to like
it we'll get the policies we all want
past now almost everybody realizes that
until we fix this broken Congress
nothing else can happen so it's not like
this is the most important issue out
there you know you can think climate
change or healthcare or jobs or
competitive you can think those are the
important issues but what people
increasingly seeing is that this is the
first issue if we don't fix this we
don't fix anything
and what's really encouraging to me is
that that frame is increasingly being
embraced by important leaders so you
know about six years ago I think Nancy
Pelosi was on Jon Stewart's show The
Daily Show and Stewart said you know the
whole system is corrupt and Nancy
Pelosi's no no the system's not corrupt
it people in the system are corrupt but
the Pistons not corrupt and Jon Stewart
just had a field day because of how
ridiculous that statement is now but now
Nancy Pelosi
is going to introduce as HR 1 the most
ambitious and comprehensive reform
package that Washington I think has ever
seen I mean it is unbelievable in its
breadth so it has public funding of
congressional campaigns so that
congressmen don't spend 30 to 70 percent
of their time sucking up to look to the
Lester's it has a mandate to end
gerrymandering political partisan
gerrymandering exercising Congress's
power under the Constitution to tell the
states clean this mess up it has an
incredible ethics package to kind of
close block the revolving door so
congressman or not running off to K
Street and it has an incredible
restoration of voting rights the
reservoir rate restoration was Voting
Rights Act automatic voter registration
it's the most comprehensive package of
political reform I think the civil
rights bill of the generation but of
course nobody outside of Washington has
heard anything about it because most
people look at what Washington does and
says it's just a game the Democrats are
playing to embarrass the Republicans how
would they stop congressmen from
becoming lobbyists well one thing they
do and then the loopholes into it but
one thing they can do is they can
basically say once your Congressman you
can't be a lobbyist for five years and
for five years yeah or whatever the time
is but the more fundamental fact is you
know if you change the way you fund
campaigns if it was no longer the
lobbyists who were kind of channeling
the money in or that were getting their
clients to channel the money in then
it's not like there wouldn't be
lobbyists anymore they just wouldn't be
so well paid they wouldn't be as
valuable hmm and if they're not as
valuable it's not as valuable for them
to pay the congressman an incredible
amount of money to become konk lobbyist
you know they would become almost like
you know lawyers policy wants they kind
of go to Capitol Hill and say here's
what will happen if you adopt this
legislation you know that's an important
part of the process but they wouldn't be
the mockers in the system they wouldn't
be the people who called the shots and
so the value of their services would
fall and if the value of their services
fell then
it wouldn't make so much sense to go and
become a lobbyist maybe you'd come home
and be a doctor again or come home and
like be a businessperson again or do
whatever you want back in your district
so I think if you change the way you
fund campaigns you would change 70% of
the problem you would just fix it right
then and these other things are good
additions but not as critical but
without changing the way you fund
campaigns I think all of these other
changes are irrelevant I just can't get
over the money you always hear the
phrase take money out of politics it's a
constant phrase but that's not really
possible no and I don't think it's
really good but no it isn't the point
isn't to get money out the point is to
get money that doesn't represent a tiny
fraction of the special interests
controlling how Congress people think so
I think today a congressman from
California wrote Kahana is gonna
introduce a bill that he hopes will be
eventually part of whatever this big
reform package is that would create a
way of funding campaigns where everybody
gets a voucher or a set of vouchers you
know so Seattle has done this for city
elections where everybody gets four
twenty five dollar vouchers that are
only usable to fund campaigns so a
candidate comes around and tries to
persuade you to give him or her the
voucher and then they take that voucher
and they use it to fund campaigns okay
if roe kahan is bill passed and
everybody had vouchers to use to fund
congressional campaigns and you know the
idea is basically you take the rebate of
the first $50 of your taxes which every
American pays at least fifty dollars to
the federal government you take that
first fifty dollars you give it back and
you give it in the form of a voucher and
you say take this voucher and help fund
campaigns with it congressmen would
still be raising money they'd still be
spending a large time raising money but
they wouldn't be raising money from the
tiny fraction of the 1% they'd be
raising money from everybody and so the
point is that you would be using that
money to spread the influence in the way
that a democracy is supposed to spread
the influence to every American as
opposed to the influence in a tiny tiny
fraction of the 1% so that wouldn't get
less money I think that could be more
money in the system but it wouldn't be
corrupting money because it would be
money that is
product accountable but the Lester's of
the world would probably try to put the
kibosh on yeah before it ever got moving
yeah I mean you know the biggest block
to anything like HR 1 happening is that
the most influential people in
Washington have the most to lose right
the lobbyists you know the value of the
industry of lobbying just collapses and
those people are gonna fight like hell
to block it
yeah which is why as wonderful as it is
to me to see somebody like Nancy Pelosi
take up the charge and say here it is
here's a package of reform it can be the
first thing we do fix democracy first
what what's true what's obvious about
this is without a president taking up
the charge it's never gonna happen and
what's most depressing to me is that
right now in the Democratic Party you
don't have any candidate for president
who's making reform even an important
issue let alone a primary issue and of
course we had a president who was
elected under the drain the swamp slogan
but of course nobody believes he has any
plan or have any intent to do anything
to trade in that swamp yeah I'm hoping
that having him in office is such a that
the whole thing was such a clusterfuck
and and that so many people are so
disturbed that it's gonna make people
more politically active yeah and more
aware of the consequences of having
someone like that in office yeah and
actually weirdly unifying yeah because
even though the Democrats are not doing
this right now which is really
depressing to me you know we we have
these things that we know we disagree
about and we like fuel the politics of
hate as we kind of yell at each other
about these things but there's a set of
issues that we all agree about and the
the most important set of issues we all
agree about is the deeply corrupted
nature of this government there was a
poll done by a University of Maryland
the middle of 2016 but asking about
anger and frustration with government
found the highest level of frustration
in the history of polling and then when
they asked the reasons why they were so
angry and so disaffected with her
government the reasons people gave were
all the same things like the influence
of money the influence of lobbyists the
parties care more about corporations
about and then then we broke them down
about how do Republicans think about
this and how do Democrats think about
this there was no statistical difference
between Republicans and Democrats hmm
you know sometimes the Democrats were
more concerned sometimes the Republicans
and the levels were at like eighty and
ninety percent so literally eighty four
percent of Americans would say it is big
money that is corrupting the way our
Congress functions right so here is
common ground and what was so
extraordinary about the 2016 election is
watch a Republican candidate stand on a
debate stage you know in September of
Donald Trump stood on a debate stage and
pointed to every one of those candidates
and said I own all of you I've given all
of you money and I know the way the
system works and the system is corrupt
and he called super PACs an abomination
and he attacked the idea of money in
politics and so what that signaled is
that Republicans too could be rallied to
this cause of addressing this deeply
corrupted political system if only we
could find the candidates who would do
it and I think what Donald Trump has
done is teed up this moment where we can
step back and say look we disagree about
a lot of things whether it's GMO or
climate change whether it's health care
for all or college for all whatever we
disagree about a loving we got to work a
lot of things out but here is something
we all agree about and we should be
smart enough to realize if we don't fix
this the none of the things were arguing
about matter you know you can't it's not
serious to stand on a debate stage and
say you you support single-payer health
care without also saying but first we're
gonna fix this corrupted system because
there's no way to get single-payer
health care in a world where doctors and
pharmaceutical companies and insurance
companies are funding elections you
can't say you're going to get climate
change legislation in America without
addressing the corrupting influence of
money in politics because the oil come
that the dirty energy industry has an
enormous opportunity to block this
change through the way we fund campaigns
so this is a moment where we should be
able to get everybody in this political
system to step back and say hey wait the
system is broken we can see it's broken
the first thing we have to do is to fix
the broken Congress and if we fix that
Congo
then we have a chance to have an
argument about what policy makes sense
for America and and we each have our
views but no views are different but the
thing we don't agree about we should be
able to agree on now if that's a
universal agreement amongst Republicans
and Democrats that funding and that
money and that all this is what's
ruining politics the the people that are
donating all this money that the these
the Lester's of the world what could
they possibly do to stop this reform and
what's their reaction to this kind of
reform yeah yeah so let me be clear
about one really important thing I when
I say Republicans and Democrats what I
mean is people in the districts across
magazine Washington right you know like
Mitch McConnell is you know I think the
focus of evil in the modern world Mitch
McConnell will block any reform here at
all so you know Nancy Pelosi can offer
what she wants but it'll never get
through the Senate because of Mitch
McConnell and so there are many
Republicans in Washington we're gonna
block in it reform but um but when you
ask you know the Republicans in
Washington and the Lester's what can
they do to stop it
well again the game strategy is clear
they've deployed it before right so you
know they'll say things like this is
welfare for politicians this is just
corrupting free speech you don't believe
in the First Amendment if you don't
believe that you know the Koch brothers
or the Soros is have the right to spend
unlimited amounts of money in political
speech and so I think the way around
that fight is to agree free speech is
the fundamental value and nothing of the
reforms I support would like try to
restrict people's ability to speak what
we're talking about is congressmen
raising money we're not talking about
individuals speaking in the marketplace
so you have a very loud voice Joe your
voice is heard by millions and nothing
in our Constitution should permit the
government to be able to suppress you at
all so long as you're within the bounds
of decency or at least not decency
because that's not a bound boundary
yes obeys often but but at least if
you're not you know spreading false
rumors and causing great harm but the
point is on even though this free speech
needs to be protected we still should be
able to focus on the influence the
economy of influence congressmen live
under when they spend 30 to 70 percent
of time sucking up to the Lester's to
fund their campaigns that should be a
focus of regulation without the First
Amendment getting in the way because we
want a congress filled with people who
care about what their voters want not
what their funders want the framers
didn't create a constitution to
replicate an aristocracy they were
fighting an aristocracy they had a
system where there was a house the House
of Lords they had to ask the aristocracy
what do you want and everything could be
blocked if the aristocracy didn't like
it well we've replicated that system
more efficiently in America than they
had there because we have a system where
both the House of Representatives and
the Senate is filled with people who are
obsessed with a single question what -
my funders want and if they can't answer
that question in a way that supports the
legislation and they're not going to
support the legislation or if it's
important for them to block legislation
they will block legislation and that's
the dynamic of Washington right now
um francis fukuyama describes our
government as a V tock receive veto ah
cracy and what he means by that is that
there are so many places or influence
powerful influence can block the ability
of the government to do something that
it just can't do anything anymore and
that's I think the consequence of
allowing this corruption of money to be
so deeply woven into our political
system is it possible to fix yeah it is
possible to fix because you know for
example HR 1 + Row kahana's bill all
perfectly constitutional you don't have
to amend the Constitution to do it I
think that bill alone would solve 80% of
the problem the possibility the problem
isn't like conceiving of what changes
have to happen the question is how do
you build the political movement to get
there and what that takes is leaders
willing to say
we have to fix this corrupted democracy
first and and leaders who stop like
pretending that we can get like a
Christmas list of great changes in
government without fixing this democracy
first so you know Bernie published last
month in the Washington Post list of the
ten things that should happen in the
first hundred days in the next
democratic administration ten great
ideas not a single one of those ideas
address the corruption of our political
system you know it was just a it was
just a Christmas list of all the things
that the progressives want and you know
I'm a progressive I want some of those
things but the point is like what things
were there well you know things like a
trillion dollar infrastructure project
single-payer health care free college
you know all the things that bernie is
pushing and has made so sale it and
things that I think it's great that he
has made salient I mean he's a hero and
like making these issues central to at
least the debate but what frustrates me
is that instead of focusing our anger on
the billionaire's which he does we need
to focus more anger on the congressmen
the politicians which he does not I mean
the guy's been in Congress for almost
thirty years now and so it might be
natural for him not to notice that the
people around him are the problem is it
a natural thing or do you think that
he's possibly aware of the consequences
of stirring up that hornet's nest
because you know if anybody has a right
to complain when the DNC conspired to
rig the primaries against him he's the
number one guy he should be screaming
from the rooftops you're dealing with a
corrupt system and this is disgusting
and he didn't it didn't do that
and he didn't do that while Hillary
Clinton was running for president and he
knew it he knew he had been screwed out
of the primaries he knew they had
conspired he knew it was all illegal and
he kind of just kept his mouth shut
yeah well I think you know that was a
responsibility I think that was a kind
of you know I was a person reflecting on
the horrendous outcome if he took
Hillary Clinton down and so I think he
restrained himself you know now
perfectly I mean the fact is after it
was clear he was not gonna be the
nominee he's still continued to talk
about the court corruption
hillarie which Donald then picked up and
moved into a weapon against her but I
think he recognizes you know as every
responsible politician does that you
know it's not just about him it's about
the future of America so when he
restrained himself and didn't want to
take the whole system down then um I I
get that but what I'm talking about now
right I'm talking about when you've got
the House of Representatives talking
about fundamental reform it'll be the
first thing they take up we at least
ought to have a presidential campaign
where candidates are saying hell yes the
first thing we will do is to end the
corruption that makes it impossible for
this Congress to function and stop
pretending like we can get all these
wonderful things given to us by Santa
Claus without fixing this first you got
to do the hard work of convincing
America that there is a solution because
you know the reality is I think most of
America is where you started this
podcast most of America thinks it's
deeply corrupted and there's nothing
that can be done they're half right
it is deeply corrupted but it's not true
there's nothing that can be done we can
do something and in fact I think we can
solve almost you know 80% of it I I
still think there's constitutional
changes it might be necessary and I've
been working like how do we get
constitutional changes and talking to
people up my my podcast which of course
has about one one thousandth of the one
one millionth of the people listening to
it yours does what is your progress so
people can listen it's another way so
season two is released today which is
about an article five convention but
season one is about how to think about
the 2020 election but you know I I think
that we might have to have
constitutional change and I have been
supporting the efforts to think about
that but what we've got to do is to give
people a sense that there's something we
can do before we amend the Constitution
you know we did a poll and found 96% of
Americans believe it important to reduce
the influence of money in politics
ninety-one percent didn't think it was
possible so that's the politics of
resignation
you know if you've gone to Egypt under
Mubarak and you'd stopped the average
person in the street and said you know
what do you think of Mubarak they would
have said you know we hate Mubarak and
then say why aren't you doing anything
about it and they say because nothing
can be done or you know
african-americans didn't I
1800 in America what do you think about
Jim Crow you know we hate Jim Crow why
aren't you doing anything about it well
because there's nothing to be done about
it well that's how Americans think about
this political corruption they hate it
they think it's deeply unjust
inconsistent with what they thought
America was about but they don't do
anything about it because they don't
think there's anything to be done about
it and that's where leaders have a role
and what we need are leaders running for
president right now to begin to explain
to people here's what we could do if
only we built the power to do it
recognizing the most important
opposition here the lobbyists in
Washington are going to be an incredibly
difficult group to to defeat but we can
do that and if we do that every other
issue becomes easier to resolve in a
sensible way now there's no public
support for lobbyists right there's no
there's no people out there that are
super psyched that lobbyists are out
there and in exerting their influence on
our world but they obviously have
enormous financial backing behind them
and they have incredible influence in
our in our culture but if you had some
magic wand you could wave across this
system and fix it wouldn't removing
lobbyists be one of the first things
that you would do no no why so well
because look you know Congress
especially in the current government
legislates on a whole bunch of issues
mm-hmm that they don't have a clue about
right they don't know squat diddly about
99 percent of what they're legislating
about they need information um one of
the other things Gingrich did was to
completely emaciate Congress's own
information service they used to have a
really powerful information service to
help congressmen figure things out all
that's basically gone so they rely on
outsiders to come in and help them
understand it now my view is you know
that's an imperfect system because
there's great inequality among the
quality of lobbyists but if all
lobbyists were doing was providing
information like congressman here's
what's going to happen if you pass this
bill like these jobs will disappear or
this lead will reappear in the
water system if that's all they were
doing that's a really valuable thing
information to the Congress to help
Congress decide what to do is an
essential part of making democracy work
the part of lobbying that is the
corrupting part where they become the
mockers for the money not so much that
they give it directly but you know they
call their clients and they say you need
everybody at the sea level in your
corporation to send twenty seven hundred
dollars to this person and and they
steer it like that when they become the
kind of source of resource for members
of Congress that's when they have this
influence which is not related to their
argument so you know I've met lobbyists
who who hate the system as it is right
now they'll say things like look I want
a system where I win because my ideas
are good my arguments are better I don't
want a system where I win because I'm
able to channel more money than that guy
because that's not a democracy like a
democracy should be these
representatives are listening to us and
then they do the right thing based on
what they think helps their constituents
not how much they're going to raise if
they do this over that how many
lobbyists are there oh man I can't
answer that question you know one of the
big problems we've got is that the law
has been weakened in registering
lobbyists so you know we have tens of
thousands of people who are functioning
effectively of lobbyists but don't have
to call themselves lobbyists you have
these members of Congress who go to
government relations departments and
they oversee the government relations
department as long as they don't go onto
Capitol Hill and shake hands but instead
set up the meetings on Capitol Hill with
the lower people shaking hands they're
not called lobbyists so if you look at
the lobbying numbers it looks like we
peaked and lobbying about three years
ago and now are declining but what that
is in fact is that the rules have been
interpreted or allowed to be unenforced
so that many people who are lobbyists
actually aren't actually functioning as
lobbyists today so they are lobbyists
but they don't wear the label is
lobbyists what do they call themselves
government relations people experts yeah
you know and they aren't they could say
they're not technically lobbyists and
you know I got into a huge fight with
Scott Brown you remember Scott Brown who
ran for who was a senator in
Massachusetts he ran on a Tea Party
ticket and I was like this amazing
Republican to win as a senator in
Massachusetts and then Elizabeth Warren
defeated him in the in the in the
election two years into his term um he
then went to Massachusetts to New
Hampshire and ran for Senate and I was
helping a Republican in New Hampshire
who was a reformer running for Senate
and we've referred to Amazon lobbyists
and he went ballistic said I'm not a
lobbyist and then he said I'm not
technically a lobbyist he's a government
relations person who's like calling
people on Capitol Hill he used to be
with him the Senate trying to get them
to do things for him but he doesn't
quote a technical lobbyist so merely
because the IRS wouldn't refer to him as
a lobbyist he thought it was outrageous
and fraud for me to refer to him as what
we all know he is which is obvious so
lobbyists being a lobbyist is not
defined by your actions it's defined by
your label it's defined by did you have
to fill something out to be a lobbyist
well once you are a lobbyist according
to the law you've got all sorts of
obligations of reporting who you're
spending your time with what you're
spending money on government relations
yeah government relations people at a
certain level the to certain things
aren't caught lobbyists but yet they
have the exact same function even more
because they've got tons of people
working for them they it gets into ploy
in their doing
how would that ever be how would you
ever put a dam up there well you know
you only put a dam up there if you got
the political will to make it happen
right you only get the political will to
make it happen if you have a political
process that focuses America on this
deeply corrupting problem and says god
damn it we have to fix this and if you
had that will if you said we're just
gonna fix this and you had like the you
know the geeks then go down the list of
25 things that have to happen to make it
so we have our Congress that's worried
about being representative of America as
opposed to representative of the
Lester's in America we could do it it's
not
rocket science it really is not that
hard you got to think carefully about
what kind of incentives you're producing
I'm not saying it's like obvious we're
not going to sketch the full plan here
but it's possible it is constitutional
to do it and if we just built the
political will to get there we could do
it and the only way build a political
will it's really important right now
because right now people especially
people like you need to be saying to
every one of the politicians is going to
be sucking up to try to be on your show
to try to have a chance to get their
voice out to the class of you to the
people who are listening to your
podcasts it's important people like you
to say okay what are you gonna do about
this problem this problem in particular
is it a priority or is it like one of 12
things on your list I mean I imagine
it's 11 for Bernie or 12 somewhere on
the list but the question isn't you know
is it on the list because every one of
them is gonna say yeah of course I
support reform the question is are you
gonna bring America around so that
America thinks on day one this is what
will happen whatever else happens this
is gonna happen and my view is if there
were a Democrat running for president
who said look hold on we're gonna fix
this and the Trump errs who were
draining the swamp
you know the 25% of that base that's
drained the swampers come with me
because that guy did not drain the swamp
that guy filled the swamp swamp monsters
are bigger and more vital now than now
than they ever were but come with me we
actually will do it I think there's a
way to break this election so that it
becomes an election about the unity
around this recognition rather than the
disunity which is the screaming left
against the screaming right which is the
way things right now we're evolving to a
person on sitting on the outside who
doesn't have any involvement politics
like myself it seems so unbelievably
complicated that it exhausts you when
you start examining it and trying to pay
attention to it and how the system works
correct me if I'm wrong but in the
recent past there was something that was
changed that allows corporations to
donate money the same way that an
individual would right so in 2010 the
United States Supreme Court decided a
case called Citizens United
and citizens united said that you
couldn't limit limit a corporation's
ability to spend money independently of
a political campaign
so corporation is not allowed to
contribute directly but that's not worth
that much because you're only allowed to
give a total of fifty four hundred
dollars to a candidate over the course
of the life of his campaign but what
citizens united said is that the
Constitution protects the right of the
corporation to engage in political
speech independent of a political
campaign so if you know if some
congressman is running for Congress
Exxon corporation can come in and spend
a million dollars to say why that
congressman is a good congressman know
why that congressman is a terrible
congressman but they have a
constitutional right to do that now when
that happened there are a bunch of us
who were you know chicken littles about
this who said how this is the end of
democracy because these corporations are
just going to spend unbelievable amounts
of money in the political process like
spending their money to affect the
results and that was not correct because
what happened is corporations quickly
discovered the high price of free speech
alright so corporations like Target
backed a anti-gay candidate for governor
and all of a sudden found their stores
being picketed across the country
because people were furious that they
would be supporting such a candidate for
governor so corporations too quickly
found that it's not cheap to engage in
political speech in the marketplace they
didn't want to do it like that instead
they wanted to find a way to channel
their money into dark money
organizations or into what evolved after
citizens united something called super
PACs so super PACs were created not by
the Supreme Court super PACs were
created by a lower court that said well
if you can spend unlimited amounts of
money you should be allowed to give
unlimited amounts of money to an
independent political action committee
that was the super PAC Supreme Court has
never ruled on that question we had a
case that we're taking up to Alaska
that's trying to appeal to the Supreme
Court to get them to actually decide
whether super PACs are mandated by the
Constitution and what's different about
this case is the argument we're making
is to the Conservatives what we're
saying is the framers of our
Constitution were obsessed with
corruption that was the issue that they
were overwhelmingly trying to avoid and
they weren't focused on bribery they
were focused on institutional corruption
these institutions it became unconnected
to their purpose representing Americans
and what our view is is you know these
conservatives on the Supreme Court like
you know Neil Gorsuch or Justice Thomas
or Brett Cavanaugh who say that we
interpret the Constitution of the way
the framers would have interpreted it
we're gonna make the argument to them
which is there is no doubt the framers
of the Constitution would have looked at
these super PACs and said these are an
abomination these are outrageous from
the perspective of that democracy they
were trying to create and those justices
should at least one of them be willing
to stand up and defend the framers
values against this modern corruption
and if just one of them voted with the
four liberals who have already said they
think super PACs are an abomination then
we could have a way to end the super
PACs in this system and that and that
would be an enormous benefit because
they've become so powerful but the
courts alone can't save us even if you
ended super PACs tomorrow you still have
lesterland
because the super PACs are not what I
was talking about in lesterland when I
was talking about Lester lamb was giving
two candidates directly and the small
number of people would still be giving
two candidates directly and the only way
to solve that is for Congress to pass
new laws that change the way campaigns
get funded that's the sort of thing HR 1
is trying to do as the sort of thing Roe
kahan is trying to do but that's the
sort of thing that we don't have a
president to support right now we don't
have Democratic presidential candidates
who are making it the champion issue
right now and it won't get done unless
they do well it seems complicated to
people when you try to explain campaign
finance and you try to explain
contributions to candidates and
contributions to sitting senators and
congressmen it's it's complicated and
there's so many different things to
think about when you're discussing this
that to a person who's on the outside
well how do you fix this well what it
what are the laws now
well how did it get that way well well
how about make it so they can't give
them money and there's all these like
real simplistic views of it from the
outside but it seems that it at the very
least limiting the amount of money that
someone's a lot like what is the maximum
amount of money someone can give to a
candidate right now in the primary in
the general it's fifty four hundred
dollars twenty seven dollars in each and
that goes up according to inflation and
that's pretty small potatoes compared to
what the super pacs are doing right so
you have these people running who expect
they're going to raise the money to run
their office from their direct
contributions but they're counting on
the super PACs to come in and spend
ungodly amounts of money like tens of
millions of dollars to support their
candidate or to oppose their Optima
their opponent and so the supporters for
those super PACs aren't even tiny those
are the Adolf's in America people named
Adolf this is a tiny tiny tiny number of
people who are contributing to those to
those things but you're right people
look there's no reason why most
Americans should understand the
complexities of campaign finance law and
they don't need to what they need to ask
is do we have a system of integrity in
the way we select representatives and if
you're if you're not brain-dead in
America you believe the answer to that
question is no we do not have a system
of integrity there's no representational
integrity it is corrupted in all the
obvious phrase and like nobody should
like be forced to study campaign finance
in order to have the entitlement to say
hell hell no the system has got to end
and so I think you're right if we've you
know people are forced to like
articulate all the 34 different changes
that have to happen we're never going to
get there but let's not go there let's
just start and end with it is a
corrupted system and we want politicians
to fix it and if they don't fix it we'll
throw them out until we get the
politicians who do and if we could build
that as the movement that recognition
the core message of 2020 I think there's
a real shot because we've primed the
Republican Party there are a lot of
people in that party who are now so
disgusted with the corruption of this
system not necessarily Mitch McConnell
he loves it but
you know an ordinary Republican voters
and the Democrats have now committed
themselves to fixing this corrupted
system this is the moment to do that and
we don't have to get into the details of
how much you should be allowed to
contribute to say there is a way to fix
this that would give us a representative
democracy maybe not again but for the
first time why is Mitch McConnell so
uniquely evil this guy has had it in his
DNA from the first moment he went to
Washington to end any regulation of
money in politics he engineered the
selection of the FEC this is the Federal
Election Commission commissioners so
that they would block basically every
enforcement action with the FEC the FEC
does nothing now because it's a
commission that has half Republicans and
half Democrats so if the Republicans
disagree from the Democrats then nothing
gets done they can't enforce the most
simple rules anymore because Mitch
McConnell has populated the FEC with
people who don't believe in campaign
finance rules he has said citizens
united this decision that said
corporations could give unlimited
amounts of money to independent
political speaking it says one of the
greatest decisions of the Supreme Court
and he said he was going to fight like
hell to defend it and when this proposed
HR 1 was raised to him Mitch McConnell
said there is not a chance in hell this
will ever even get a debate in the
Senate this man is obsessed with the
idea that money should have the power in
Washington that it has right now and
people are talking about reforming it
are the enemy and so you know the thing
about Mitch McConnell is he's actually
an incredibly smart man and he's an
incredibly smart strategist and he's
been playing this game for a long time
and and I think he's like responsible
for 85% of the judicial structure that
makes it possible for this to be blocked
there's an amazing series of debates
happened 20 years ago between John
McCain and Mitch McConnell so this was
when Congress was passing something on
the mccain-feingold law which was the
last great effort to deal with this
problem it was flawed in a bunch of ways
but it was an important success Mitch
McConnell
stood on the floor of the Senate and
said mr. McCain says that the Senate we
can't say must regain so the senator
from Arizona
has said that the system is corrupt I
want him to name the corrupt people and
McCain stands there and said I'm not
talking about particular individuals I'm
talking about the system it's the
system's corrupt and then McConnell
almost clueless just said if the system
is corrupt
there must be corrupt people if there's
not corrupt people then the systems not
corrupt so the only corruption he can
imagine was corruption where somebody
was taking a bribe and if that's the
only corruption we're allowed to remedy
then the whole system of influence we
have right now is not to be touched but
you know I didn't Kane's point was you
can have a system filled with lots of
honors Congress people and lots of
honest senators who never engage in
bribery but they know how to bob and
weave and Bend and speak and say the
right things to attract the right kind
of money and that's as much corruption
as bribery is and McCain's view was we
had to end it so he was the last great
Republican fighter for reform of this
corrupted system they've been many
before Barry Goldwater was an incredibly
vocal opponent to the role of money in
politics but I think what we have to do
is to find a way to revive that and to
leverage from this president's assertion
that this is a corrupt system and we
have to change the system into actually
building the political power to make
that change happen another thing that's
very weird is that every four years or
so there's this cry to eliminate the
Electoral College every four years ago
people realized that the battleground
states are so critical and that so much
money is being spent on this small
handful of states because they give you
all the electoral votes and this is how
you win an election and then people say
well why is that that doesn't make any
sense it should be one-person one-vote
are we really that divided as a nation
that we need to isolate ourselves into
these small little lines and the on the
dirt where you know if this part is
worth this amount and that parts worth
that amount and so everybody plays this
weird electoral college game and then
you get a situation like what just
happened where
Hilary Clinton wins the popular vote but
is not the president because the
electoral college is what what makes
everything yeah so the way you just
described this problem is exactly the
way people have to think about it
the problem isn't I mean it is a bad
thing that the loser wins I mean that's
just not the way elections supposed to
work so that's happened twice in our
lifetime yeah
and it happened 100 years before that
and it's gonna happen more frequently
going forward we can show that
demographically but that's not the real
problem the real problem is that in
every election the presidential
candidates are focused on just 14 states
the battleground states the purple
states and those 14 states are the only
states that matter to those candidates
and and what scholars have demonstrated
is the presidents and campaigns Bend
themselves and their policies to make
those states happy and those states
don't represent America they're older
they're whiter their industry is kind of
19th century industry there are seven
and a half times the number of people in
America working in solar energy as mine
coal but you never hear about solar
energy in a presidential campaign
because those people live in California
and Texas they don't matter to the
presidential election what you hear
about is coal mining because the fifty
thousand coal miners left in America
happened to live in these battleground
states so this is just a product of the
way the electoral college of the way
states count their votes to allocate
their electors something called the
winner-take-all system so all but two
states say that the winner of the
popular vote gets all of the electoral
votes for that state so in you know in
2000 in Florida George Bush won that
state based on a stop to recount by 531
votes he got all the electoral college
votes in that state even though he just
barely won that state and so
winner-take-all is what makes it so that
it doesn't make sense for anybody to
spay pay any attention to any of the non
battleground states and pend all of your
time in the battleground states in 2016
99% of campaign spending was in 14
states 99 99 % ninety-five percent of
time but the only time
they were not 99% in those battleground
states as the other 5% they were in New
York and California raising money rights
okay
so this is a system designed to give
power to these battleground states and
then you say well why is it something
the Constitution requires and the answer
to that is absolutely not the
Constitution does not say how the states
will allocate their electors and indeed
when states started adopting this
winner-take-all system many thought it
was an outrageous perversion of the
constitutional design so Jeff so
Jefferson was outraged but then he said
well some states are going to do it then
all states have to do it because if
you're a state that allocates all of
your electives to the winner you're
gonna have more power than your
neighboring state did against half the
electors to the winner so very quickly
there was a race to the bottom and
that's kind of where it's stuck and so
the question is that what we can do
about it well there are two big reform
efforts out there one of them is called
the national popular vote compact I mean
I should say you know you can imagine
amending the Constitution but it takes
three-fourths of the states to change
the constitution and three-fourths of
the states are not going to agree with
abolishing the electoral college so this
is not going to happen anytime soon
through the Constitution but there are
two ways without amending the
Constitution we could fix this problem
one the national popular vote prot
compact is basically states who say look
we're going to pledge our electors to
the winner of the National popular vote
so the state you know looks at who won
the National popular vote and then picks
the slate of electors from their state
with the party of the person who won the
national popular vote so in a state like
New York if the Republican won the
national popular vote even though most
people in New York are democratic they
would allocate their electors to the
Republican vice versa in Texas that's
that's the way that system would work
and you know I personally like the
system because I believe in the idea of
one-person one-vote everybody's vote is
an American citizen for the American
president should be equal it shouldn't
shouldn't matter that you're having to
live in Wyoming versus Pennsylvania
versus New York but there are people are
worried about this because they fear
that it'll become a kind of flyover
democracy but the only
places that candidates will care about
will be posted like you know LA or New
York or Chicago I actually don't think
that's right but I get the understanding
I think they're wrong about the way the
campaigns work but I understand why
they're anxious about it so then that
leads to the alternative solution which
is something you know my group equals
citizens that US is litigating this
right now which is trying to declare
this winner-take-all system
violates the Constitution because it
basically says that if you're a
Republican in California your vote never
matters if you're a Democrat in Texas
your vote never matters because we just
count your vote up and then we throw it
away right because we allocate all the
electors to the dominant party in your
state and so we've got David Boies as
our chief litigator we've got a case in
California Texas South Carolina and
Massachusetts asking the courts to
declare winner-take-all unconstitutional
and instead say that electors have to be
allocated proportionally
so if you get 40% of the vote in the
state you get 40% of the electors if you
get 50% you get 50% of the doctors and
what that would do overnight is it would
make every state in the nation
competitive like there'd be a reason for
a Democrat to go to Texas because you're
not gonna get all the electoral votes
you're not gonna get 1/2 the electoral
votes but you'll get 40% maybe 45% and
that could matter or a Republican would
go to California because you know you're
not gonna get all the votes in
California but you're gonna get a lot
there a lot of Republicans in California
um so this change would immediately make
every state in play but unlike the
national popular vote alternative there
are many people who look at this and say
this would be better because small
states would still have a pretty
important role like an elector as an
elector and if I can get it from Arizona
I'm gonna care about Arizona if I can
get from Arkansas I'll care about
Arkansas I'm so it's not gonna just be
the big states or the big population
centers it's going to be every state and
so if we can get you know a court to say
this violates the Constitution then you
could have states forests to allocate
their electors proportionally and if
they did that then the problem that you
identified at the start which I
is the problem could be solved overnight
you would no longer have these
battleground states deciding everything
you never president who cares about
getting elected by all of America and
that would be an incredible improvement
though that seems like in in and of
itself would be a game-changer yes if
they could do that that would change a
lot but one of the things you said you
said you don't think that it's possible
that we would ever vote out the
Electoral College but is there support
for the electoral college is there a
good argument for it so there is support
for the idea that every state have a
role and there's a support for the idea
that small states got a kind of thumb on
the scale which is what the Electoral
College does so there is some support
but most people you know 70% of people
don't like the idea that the president
is not chosen from the majority of
voters though right so most people would
oppose it but the point is to change the
Constitution you need the state
legislatures or state conventions to
agree with the change and what many
states at least 13 states I fear would
say is that you know we actually win
more under the system than we lose so
we're not gonna change the system and so
unless you get like some overwhelmingly
popular movement to support it or again
you know you can imagine a presidential
candidate who kind of made fixing this
part of the democracy part of the plan
too I don't see how you're gonna build
the political movement to get there
another way of putting it is you know
this national popular vote compact which
is going around state to state in
getting states to join right now has
about a hundred and so the way this
works is that when the equivalent of 270
electoral votes have been committed
then the compact kicks in so when they
get to 270 the problem goes you know the
problem of this electoral college goes
away because at 270 according to the
plan the winner of the popular vote wins
the electoral college they right now
have a hundred and seventy two electors
pledged right so they have less than 100
more to go but the problem is they've
got to convince states to join the
compact
and they're kind of they kind of hit
this red wall now because many
Republicans think the only way to win
the presidency is through the electoral
college now so many state legislators
why do they believe that I think many
Republicans just think that their great
benefit is from the electoral college
it's not surprising because the
battleground states are primarily
Republic and because the base number of
Republican states is so high right
because you know these small rural
states get disproportionately more
electors than states like California so
you know Wyoming has three electors
disproportionately turns with the
population right so they like the system
as it is and you know you look back and
you say well they got George Bush even
though he didn't win the national vote
and they got Donald Trump even though he
didn't win the national vote it's not
hard for to understand why they're there
I think again I I don't think they're
right about this you know in 2004 if
fifty thousand votes had switched to
John Kerry in Ohio then John Kerry would
have won the electoral college but lost
the popular vote and if that had
happened in 2004 I think the Electoral
College would be dead today really
because a Republican won in 2000 a
Democrat run in 2004 people would say
this system is just crazy we got to get
rid of this system but now people think
well Republicans benefit from this so
I'm a Republican I'm gonna block the
change and if that's true that it's
never going to happen at a
constitutional level because the
Constitution requires three-fourths of
the states to support the reform and the
reinforcement it does that Donald Trump
won without having the popular one yeah
yeah and you know of course nothing
there's no hypocrisy that touches this
president but we remember in 2012 when
there was a moment for about 10 minutes
when the national media was reporting
that that Romney was going to win the
popular vote but Barack Obama was going
to be elected by the electoral college
Trump started tweeting vigorously about
how this is a denial of democracy we
have to march on Washington to end this
banana republic like system because the
electoral college was the worst possible
thing in the world and of course after
2016 he had different views about the
electoral college I wasn't old enough to
understand what was going on during
Watergate
what year was that well 70 so you know
the break-in happens in the lead-up to
the 72 election and then he eventually
resigns after that but this is our
Watergate yeah at this moment right now
Cohen's gonna go to jail for three years
and I mean he's testifying against Trump
and all these people are testifying and
they're calling him what do they call
him co-conspirator number one is that
the individual official individual
number one this is a very unusual moment
for us to be watching this all unfold
and to see this slow dissection what
Mueller seems to be doing is like slowly
closing off all the escape routes yeah
and slowly circling the troops around
this one area that he's trying to that
he's that he's attacking yeah so on he's
a brilliant tactician yeah and and and
so I think it's clear that the worst for
Donald Trump has yet to come and I do
think the parallel is Watergate but
there's a really important difference
here you know um so I'm old enough to
remember what Watergate I was like 12 or
13 when this happened and my uncle
happened to be the lawyer who worked in
the House of Representatives convincing
the House of Representatives to vote the
articles of impeachment so he and that
weekend when Nixon resigned he came to
visit us we lived in the Kentucky part
of Pennsylvania the kind of right-wing
middle part of the state he came to
visit us and he told me if this was
going to happen and that was the event
that was the weekend and I decided I
wanted to become a lawyer but but the
big difference between these two times
is that when that happened the way most
people got access to news was three
television networks every day they
watched the news at the same time
because there was nothing else on and
those three television networks kind of
shot right down the middle and told the
story as they saw it you know it's kind
of a Walter Cronkite era of news and as
this story broke they just reported it
as they saw it and as they saw it it was
a pretty damning indictment of the
President
and what's amazing is he watched the
polling among Republicans and their
support for the president six months
before the president resigns the poll
says among Republicans he has about an
83 percent support rate and then when he
resigns his support rate about
Republicans is about 50 percent and
that's because the news newspapers and
television had like told everybody the
same story and Americans hearing the
same story came to the same view that
there was something deeply corrupt about
this president he had to go we don't
live in that news environment today we
live in an environment where half of
America lives in one news world and the
other half of miracle is in another news
world and the half of America living in
the Breitbart Fox News world are not
being told the stories that the people
living in the MSNBC NPR and news
universe are and so in this world the
opportunity for Americans to like see
the facts the same facts and have a
reflective judgment about and and come
to a view that this president you know
needs to resign or be impeached I don't
think you should be impeach but let's
that's a separate question is is not
possible and that's what's so terrifying
about it when you live in a democracy
where we don't all live in the same
universe you know right we don't know
the same facts how do you knit together
a public that can address these critical
issues of national import and and that's
I think our biggest challenge right well
it gets greater than that right with
characters like sean hannity that they
separate the line between not just being
some sort of a political pundit but
actually campaigning for the president
showing up at speeches addressing the
crowd making making these big statements
in support of the president it's very
strange to watch because i don't
remember that at the only point in time
no it wasn't the past but i think the
thing we need to realize is it is the
future because it pays cable news pays
tremendously when these people become
partisan hacks inside of a politics of
hate which is the current politics of
like both of democratic member of
publican parties and the cable news
stations
they build tribes who are deeply loyal
to them and the loyalty of those tribes
translates into advertising dollars it
is the business model of cable so Sean
Hannity looks to you know old geezers
like me like an abomination from the
perspective of what news should be like
but from the standpoint of what the
future is gonna be he is the future and
so then it becomes a question like how
do we knit together a democracy given
there will be people like the Sean
Hannity's on cable television and you
know I've begun to talk about the slow
democracy movement which I think you
know I think I pointed to you as part of
that I think that there's a need to
begin to think about how do we build
political understanding not to broadcast
television but through something else
that gives people a chance to think in
more than 30 second bites yes and
podcasting I think is a core part of
that is it entirely possible that
something could be profitable that does
shoot down the middle because people are
so tired of this CNN Fox bipolar
distribution of information I mean I
remember when the elections were going
on I would flip back and forth between
the two channels and it was like two
alternative universes there were
different worlds yeah different worlds
of focus different worlds of what
they're projecting yes but I don't think
the point is that it has to be down the
middle right I think it has to be deep
so this is what I think is so powerful
about podcasting like you know the fact
that you get people to listen to you
talk about an idea for an hour two hours
of them three hours is astonishing
literally astonishing in an age where
the most a cable news channel will
allocate to a news story is a minute and
a half two minutes three minutes right
and you know in the context of like the
tweet thinking of cable news they can't
afford to go deep on anything and
everything they're going to talk about
are the things they can talk about
sensibly in 25 seconds or 30 seconds or
40 seconds and what you know because
you've lived this life of like having
deep conversations about things that are
important is that it sometimes takes
more than 30 seconds to understand
something always yeah and the point is
if we have media that's focused at the
30-second chunk and that's how America
understand
the issues we're never gonna get
anywhere and the only way to get to
that's to get someplace is to begin to
have conversations that are at the
hour-long chunk or the two-hour long
Chuck and it's not important that that
be neutral or balanced I don't care if
it's balanced I care that it is
attempting to be serious and in-depth
understanding the issue so I don't care
if Kato wants to have podcasts they try
to tell us the deep story of an Randi in
economics or something like that that's
fine that's good I think it's important
that people start thinking about these
issues in a richer deeper way and I
think the challenge we have now is how
do we begin to produce understanding
realizing that the world of Walter
Cronkite is never coming back and it
might be a good thing but it is just
never coming back and the world of Sean
Hannity is a world that will destroy
democracy so how do we rebuild democracy
outside of that and you know if you if
you had to pick the three things that
are the most hopeful I think podcasting
is number one I think some of the
reflective deep you know
funny playful but in the end at the end
of the hour-long
segment of a podcast you understand
something you didn't understand before I
think that's number one I think comedy
like comedy television like brings
people into understanding things in a
way that's not possible
on fox news I think that you know that's
number two I think shows like homeland I
don't have you know watch rights watched
it until the read yeah yeah I know and
then that went through this dark period
in the middle but the recent seasons are
just
un-fuckin'-believable really and because
they're unbelievable because they are
such a deep rich understanding of the
tensions at issue like you want to
understand the Iran nuclear deal watch
the last season because after watching
that season you like understand the
tensions between the CIA and the
president and what's actually going on
with Israel and and I think that if you
imagine television shows aspiring to
tell the story in an entertaining way in
a way that brings people in there that
they voluntarily want to watch it but
that in the end at the end of watching a
season you understand something I
understand the current seasons about the
you know struggle and I can't wait to
watch it because it's going to be a
richer understanding of that story than
anything on television
did you watch house of cards I did up
until the season did you quit at this
season I watched the season I was very
disappointed right I watched episode one
and I said this is seems like gave it to
some different writers and it's just
craziness it just seems like like
somebody just got a hold of it and they
said I'll take it you know I'm gonna
write it my own way
Yeah right but even at the very
beginning you know the striking thing
about house of cards is it made it seem
like stuff actually could happen in
Washington yes you're like wow this
really powerful guy Frank Underwood
actually can actually get important
bills passed right and I remember
watching that saying holy shit this is
just completely not the truth this is
just not the way the system works I mean
it would be good if it worked like that
cuz at least it could do stuff but the
way it actually works is that these guys
would be scurrying around trying to
figure out you know what the tentacles
of funders are directing them to do and
the tentacles of funders added together
would be don't do anything that's not
what you're there to do hmm but what it
at least did is sort of highlight the
influences these people experienced and
it showed how deeply entrenched
everything is yeah yeah I mean I don't
want to talk it down at all man I want a
million different things like this on
prize just something that gives people
just give them a richer understanding
well an understanding period because for
the most part what people you go to
school you learn about democracy and our
system of representative government and
then you become an adult and you forget
most of what you learned and then you
hear something about the electoral
college and the popular vote and you
know then you see bills getting passed
you know what the hell is that and and
the stuff you learn at school is so
politically correct it can't actually
give you an understanding of anything
like you actually taught kids in high
school the way Congress worked you you
know the school board would go crazy and
they're like no no no you can't talk
down American democracy like that so the
truth is not teachable the only way to
get people to see the truth is to expose
it to them in a way that they want to
see it and you know my point is that's
not going to be Fox News
Fox News can never cover it at the depth
and the interest level that it needs to
be covered it's going to be things like
what you do or things like what you know
great television can do is our system of
government analogous to like taking like
DOS or Windows 95 or something like that
just continuing to patch it and never
revisit it and never come up with a new
operating system I think the better
analogy is an operating system that has
been taken over by malware virus yeah
because it's not innocent
you know das you know it was a fun
system and it like cranked to a halt
after a while when you tried to pile
more and more on top of it but that was
just kind of the limits of what it could
do there was nothing malicious in its
failure but but there's something
malicious in this failure there are
people who are eagerly focused on how to
make sure our government can't govern
because if our government can't govern
they win so you know the Koch brothers
have this amazing diverted you know
bipolar character on the one hand
they're talking about the ideals of
government but the reality is their
interventions make it so we don't have
an EPA that can regulate their companies
so basically you know we have
environmental policy that leaves their
companies alone which means they can
make tons of money by polluting our
environment without ever having to pay
the consequence of it and what they want
is not change of a particular kind
except for tax cuts what they want is
nothing to happen and so that's the kind
of you know malware that's taken over
the system of our government that's
blocked the ability to government to
function and rather than having leaders
at the center who say hold it let's just
pause for a second and realize this is a
fucking broken system we have
politicians that continue to pretend as
if everything is working you just have
to elect more Democrats and we'll get
what we want yeah
voting online what what would be the
pitfalls of that and why hasn't that
been implemented if you can Bank online
why can't you vote online so I think you
know most of the tech are the experts
who are disinterested meaning they're
not working for Diebold or something
like that
I would tell you that we don't yet have
the infrastructure to be able to be
confident about this now there are lots
of people working on I think really
great open-source implementations that
that could be could eventually produce
the kind of confidence that we need to
have to be able to vote online and so I
don't foreclose it in the long run but I
think what we've seen in the short run
is that when we turn to these
proprietary providers of technology to
enable us to vote they give us shit you
know looky look at these voting machines
there's this recent story about this 11
year old who is able to within like 15
minutes hack into the Florida election
system and change the results from you
know one one candidate to another
because you know the companies that
build these technologies are not filled
with a bunch of rocket science just like
if you're really good you're gonna go
work for Google or for Facebook or
something like that so so the
proprietary software has all of these
bugs and holes and intended backdoors
built into an intended backdoor
yeah because they need you know the
company itself needs a simple way to get
in to check or to fix things but then
they don't worry about the fact that
other people will get backdoors to be
that again this was the argument for
Diebold system that did have a third
party entrance tons of allegations about
that yeah did you ever see the
documentary hacking democracy yeah is
that disturbing to you incredibly I
don't know how much I believe about it
and was a well because I've seen so much
that contradicts some of the claims
about you know the extent to which there
was real differences in the numbers I
remembered at the election really being
anxious about it because it seemed to me
in Ohio in particular a really
compelling case was made that there was
some something weird going on but you
know the point is not so that much the
particular zuv a particular election
it's recognizing that if you turn this
over to proprietary software companies
we're going to build these closed
systems nobody can inspect there's no
reason to trust them you know they're
it's not that they are intending to make
themselves vulnerable to the Russians
they're just going to make themselves
vulnerable to the Russians and there are
alternate
systems like open-source systems that
something I know some people are
building right now that I think
eventually could get us there an
open-source system like the Linux base
something that would go on to your phone
well it could be on your phone but the
point about the open-source is that
anybody can inspect the code and be
confident that the code is doing what it
says it's direct what I'm saying about
being on your phone is the the
biometrics that we use on our phone
today or some of the most secure in
terms of being able to establish that
it's you that's making that vote like
iris scanners that you have on the I
have a Samsung Note 9 that has an iris
scanner checks my eyeballs you know your
my iPhone checks my face it takes you
the shit I mean there's they're pretty
amazing you know fingerprints obviously
but the fact that this is probably in
terms of our own personal like security
in terms of information this is probably
the most secure our smartphones are
probably the most secure devices we've
ever possessed so on the one hand yes
and that's why I say I agree with you
that in the long run we should imagine a
world where to be trivially easy to vote
just like it's not easy for me to venmo
you or cache app you I guess is your
favorite here and money that should be
the way the future is but on the other
hand we need to realize that these
technologies are also incredibly
insecure in the sense that there is now
a commercial market to exploit
insecurities inside of these phones and
you know these companies basically have
bounties that they post on the web right
for people who will come forward and
find certain holes and hacks and once
they get those hacks they use them to
leverage power and governments play this
game all the time and you know there's a
pretty strong argument that the
khashoggi murder was a product of one of
these exploits which was then going to
be revealed and the need to cover up the
fact that there was such an exploit out
there what is this I didn't know this
what is this about well so the basic
idea is that you know these companies
and many of them most prominent ones
here are Israeli companies who
facilitate the ability of governments to
buy
to your phone mmm right and the the
standard way in which this is done is to
is to pierce the security by sending you
something that you click on it and then
embeds itself in the phone there's no
way you see it in a no way that done it
can be blocked but there's there's
rumors now that in fact we've got
something more than that going on where
all they need to do is get your
telephone number and they're able to
hack into the system to get access to
your phone but the point is these
companies have a market now for selling
this type of insecurity so belt-like
cell the ability for you to get access
here and the story that you know I don't
have a lot of reasons to be absolutely
confident about this except that I trust
the person who's inside the security
world that says this to me um the story
is that this is part of what happened to
khashoggi contacts that the Saudis had
exploited this in a way that was going
to be revealed and and the simple
solution to that eventual revelation was
to remove the person who would reveal it
and that's Jesus yes so this is the
point about to recognize about these
phones on the one hand for the ordinary
life it's more secure than anything
you've ever had but in the other hand
systematically it's building insecurity
into our lives in a way that can be
exploited by powerful people and for
most people doesn't matter like most
people ordinary ordinary Joe's
you know they're never gonna be
vulnerable because nobody's gonna spend
a million dollars to get a hack against
an individual person when I hear that
from a person justifying why they don't
worry about it it drives me crazy I
can't do anything what are they gonna do
um I'm clean don't worry about me that's
not that's not what we're doing this one
we're talking about right because if we
have a system where systematically
powerful people can just push a button
and like find a way to control you right
control anybody Jamal Kosova yeah then
we've got a system that no longer makes
it possible for ordinary people to stand
up to power that's that's basically what
it is like this is the this is a
structure that allows powerful people if
it is insecure to protect themselves
because they can just leverage that
against us and I think you know this is
a completely on
focused problem like nobody is talking
about this politically but the amar ket
for this commercialized security
exploits is hugely important and we've
got to find a way to to address it mmm
so is it feasible that as technology
advances and
as the security advances as well I mean
the biometrics that we have today are
far greater than the passwords that we
use just a few years ago that there
could be something that you can't
exploit especially considering the
open-source variants where they can be
checked by the community yeah so so so
the problem is is not the kind of
particular technologies working the way
you intend them to work you know if
you've got great biometric technologies
those are really good at making sure in
the ordinary case that you're the right
person using your phone but the problem
is the code is so big and so complicated
that there's always going to be little
bugs inside the code and what these
exploits are are like coders who like
poke at the code looking for these
little hooks and they link one hook to
another hook to another hook and then
they find the way in to exploit the
system so the exploits are never well I
won't say never there's another story
it's important to recognize I'll talk
about that a second but the exploits are
not in the main case intended by anybody
it's just the onion it's just the
natural consequence of having you know
literally hundreds or millions of lines
of code that go into making this machine
work and that's what's being exploited
and when you have a world like the
iPhone which is this monoculture like
you know everybody has the same
operating system or the same versions of
the operating system if you find an
exploit in the end the iOS and Apple
doesn't know about it
and you can exploit it for six months or
a year you can you know do a lot of
damage to a lot of people's lives before
anybody gets around to it to blocking it
um no you know that's even in the best
case where everybody's working hard to
make their system as secure as it can it
can be you know there was this period
after the 9/11
when there's you know very strong
incredible allegations that the United
States government went around to these
technology companies and said we need
you to build backdoors into your
technology so we can track down the
terrorists and there's strong
allegations that in fact many of the
most important technology companies
complied and what they quickly
discovered is that the backdoor is
intended for the United States
government trying to attack terrorists
were being exploited by the Chinese
trying to steal trade secrets from
American companies so this
infrastructure that was intended to be
secure to protect American companies so
that they could do their work without
being asked about foreign espionage on
top of them became an infrastructure
that SP anon again because it's so
complicated to get it perfectly right
and the the return from exploit is so
huge that you can just expect the market
is always going to supply it what was
the other example that you're gonna
bring up that was it that was the ideas
that the intended backdoors that that
turn out to be exploited for other
purposes um but isn't the system itself
like when you deal with hanging chads or
paint hair blow their counters
ridiculous people you living giving it
up to human beings the the potential for
errors massive right to just to count
things up or the potential for
corruption the decision to ignore
certain collections I mean these this
has all been documented right yeah and
all of this follows from the fact that
we bizarrely in America
unlike most mature democracies around
the world make the running of elections
a partisan event like you know
Republicans in a district or Democrats
in a district control the voting system
like why the hell would that be why
don't we have like people who whose self
identity and professional framework is
nonpartisan independent like election
commission that's about you know it's
above the partisan battle so that
there's no incentive in Georgia for
example for the government to allocate
money to fix voting machines just in
Republican districts and not in
democratic districts or there's no
incentive to shut down a voting polling
place which they did in Georgia making
it so that people in that area would
have to go
huge distance to be able to vote or to
create it so that it takes seven hours
to vote in some districts and 20 minutes
to vote in other districts there's no
incentive to do that if your job is
simply to make it possible for people to
vote efficiently and if we measure you
and and and reward you based on how easy
have you made it for people in this
state to vote easily and efficiently we
don't get that kind of efficiency we
don't get that kind of innovation
because it's a rigged game you know you
might have people who I'm sure many of
these people are above partisan
motivation but we also know that many of
these people are deeply motivated by
partisan politics especially at that
kind of middle level of party politics
and if they can set it up so that their
side wins because of the way they've
played the game for allocating voting
resources then more power to them and
that's exactly what happened in Georgia
with this recent governor's election the
kind of outrageous that the man running
the election system secretary state does
not resign from this job as he runs for
governor and the governorship is decided
in such a very close way by the
decisions that he made about you know
how they're going to throw people off
the voting rolls or which allegations of
voting system technology will be made
across the state this is product as
making it political we could make it non
political and might not have all of
these kinds of problems we're dealing
with this very unique landscape now of
Google and Facebook and Twitter and
Instagram and all these different social
media groups that have a vested interest
in a specific narrative being portrayed
and one thing specifically is and this
is being addressed right now in Congress
is the discrimination against
conservative voices and there's a lot of
denial of that but there's also a lot of
evidence that that is the case and that
they feel like they have some moral or
ethical obligation to suppress certain
conservative voices for whatever reason
and push the narrative of progressive
and liberal voices this is a very
strange thing because the the amount of
influence that something like Google or
Facebook has today is arguably as great
or greater than the Sean Hannity's of
the world and the cnn's and the the the
the the traditional news outlets yeah so
no doubt may you know there's a big
debate about whether they were more
important in 2016 than the cable
stations my colleague Gill - Claire has
a book that argues pretty powerfully I
think that it was actually the cable
stations that were more responsible for
the result than the Facebook's but
whether in 2016 they were more powerful
someday in the future they're going to
be more powerful it's certainly powerful
absolutely I'm and you know the question
is what we mean by bias or
discrimination here like you know in
2017 in the fall it was revealed that
Facebook was selling ads for people who
wanted to target quote Jew haters okay
so you could go and you could buy ads
for Jew haters now there was never how
did that work okay no I mean you know
they have lots of categories you get to
pick when you buy Facebook ads you know
liberals or people who voted people over
60 whatever this was one of the
categories that was exposed
you could buy ads for jew-hater it was
an actual toilet yeah yeah
what yeah now there was never a time
that a facebook engineer or a marketing
person decided we ought to create a Jew
hater category right which is not a
decision of any human it was the product
of the Machine the AI that was
developing the categories based on what
they saw people happen to be interested
in and then throw up categories to see
what sticks and then certain categories
stick and then they run with them so it
so you might say you know if you were
the you know if you defamation League
you would say oh my god Facebook is you
know discriminating to encourage jus
haters but from another perspective
you're like the machines doing it no
doubt yeah but but to what extent you
want to say Facebook is doing it and I
think that's off that's often what
you're going to see in this argument
about whether they're quote biasing the
system against one side or the other you
know like this hilarious hearing that
was just held on Capitol Hill two days
ago
yes where great congressman Lou's like
if you don't want negative results in
the search then don't do bad things yeah
then um so you know I think this is nice
and quite fun it was really funny it
this is like nobody is intent we should
explain that to people who don't know
what we're talking about yeah so there
was an argument about you know whether
Google was tilting the ads to embarrass
one side or the other and I guess it was
a congressman from Iowa everybody liked
that
that's the guy who didn't know that
Google didn't make the iPhone yeah he
got embarrassed but anyway there was
this um you know the exchange was
basically here I'm gonna show you a
demonstration and they put in a certain
name and that's yeah congressman Smith
and then up comes this a reference to
his race-baiting yeah and he's like
outraged by this and you know so one
theory is you've got Google engineers
down there saying let's get congressman
Smith so we're gonna make it so every
time you put Smith in there up comes
Reese baiting but Google's responses
look we don't do individualized search
results like we give people what we
think people want based on what they've
done in the past and what they've shown
interest in and and so that's what's
producing this it's the machine that's
producing this result and that let
congressman Lou come back with you know
if you don't like the connections then
just don't enable them to be made I
don't doing things like don't do things
like race-baiting
yeah if you don't want negative search
results don't do negative yeah which is
a pretty but but I do think that it
there's a really hard problem here when
you say it's the machine is doing it
mm-hm you know what's the future going
to be like when we can just say it's not
my promise the machine that this is just
Facebook though when when you're talking
about or Google rather when you're we're
talking about Twitter twitter has a
different issue and their issue is
there's accusations of shadow banning
that they have decided that they're
going to silence certain voices or make
them much more difficult to find or
eliminate them from certain people's
feeds you know and they're doing this
this the allegation that they're doing
is based on their own personal
preferences their their beliefs that the
you know their progressive ideology
wants them to lean left and just somehow
another distribute that information and
much more left-leaning way yeah and I
hear these and I don't not an expert on
what they're doing um and I wouldn't be
surprised if you know certain complaints
come in about certain feeds and they say
we're gonna take these off that's the
allegation and they haven't denied that
um and you know quite frankly some of
these like feeds you know Alex Jones
stuff you know if you're the consequence
of your news show is that somebody takes
a gun to a pizza shop and should cut in
in Washington to try to prove that
Hillary Clinton is running a sex slave
operation in the basement there's
something wrong with what's going on
there child sex child sex slave right
yeah so I understand why they feel like
they're responsible there and you know
was recognized from very beginning these
companies have said we're gonna try to
create a certain kind of environment and
like so facebook required you identify
yourself so that under the shadows of
anonymity you wouldn't be causing
wreaking lots of havoc inside the system
but look I think the more fundamental
problem here you know so what I've said
so far people like Google and Facebook
might like here stuff they're gonna hate
the more fundamental problem here is
that we have no antitrust enforcement of
any of these companies against any of
these companies and we've allowed them
to become so incredibly powerful without
any justification under the law well
isn't the issue though that this was
never anticipated that this is now when
they created Twitter they didn't think
of it it's gonna be it's gonna be some
voice of distribution of information
that's unprecedented worldwide but
that's what it is yeah no they didn't
expect no doubt they didn't expect it to
work exactly the way it worked but the
antitrust law has from the beginning had
standards that should have said we need
to step in in certain places so for
example in 2010 Facebook is facing a
pretty powerful competitive threat from
Instagram and the question is what
they're gonna do like it's cooler to be
Instagram it's kids are using it much
the growth rate is much faster in an
ordinary competitive market what they
would do is they would build a better
product to compete with Instagram their
response was to write a check for a
billion dollars and they bought
Instagram
and and they've bought a whole bunch of
other companies including whatsapp which
you know was a very important competitor
you know in people believed a really
secure way to communicate they buy
Boston Dynamics to have a that's amazing
there's a there's a Wikipedia page it
has like endless lists of companies that
they yeah they're buying robots
yeah that makes sense I'm just find out
that's true yeah
but the point is antitrust law in any of
these moments should have and
historically would have stepped in and
said wait a minute wait a minute you
can't buy your way into complete
dominance of these markets and I think
one of the biggest changes that's
happening in the last 20 years is that
the antitrust Department has just shut
up its doors and just stopped doing its
work so if we had a more competitive
internet environment where companies had
to compete against each other you'd have
companies that try to compete by
protecting your privacy differently by
refusing to sell your information
differently you'd have lots of pressure
on companies like Facebook to behave not
because idiots senators who don't know
how Facebook works are calling them
before hearings but because the market
itself is creating the competition that
drives them to behave in a way that
actually conforms with what consumers
want so I agree with you these are real
questions and important questions to
figure out are they biasing in one way
or the other and if they're biasing
systematically that's a really important
problem but the solution to that problem
might not be more government regulation
the solution to that problem might be
government's making sure we have the
right kind of competition going on here
so that they can't get away with
behaving in this bad way well what would
be that right comic is that in fact
Google bought it and they actually sold
it last year Oh interesting probably
sold to the Russians these like what
would be the right kind of competition
it would have to be something that
balances it out right like some sort of
a right-wing social media platform but
those tend to get infested with trolls
and 4chan type people then as soon as
you say we're not gonna have any
regulation I mean the idea would be
right you say
Oh Google and Facebook they are so
progressive they lean left they suppress
conservative voices and they don't
believe in freedom of speech so we're
gonna create a right-wing platform that
allows freedom of speech and doesn't
suppress conservative voices and you
know what happens to those things they
get infested by 4chan people and the
Pepe the Frog people and they start
saying racist things if I could say
anything I'll say anything anything
means anything and that's that's a real
problem in today's day and age because
there's a lot of bored people out there
and they get excited about a platform
where they can say something that they
know is completely outrageous under an
anonymous screen name and people think
well this is indicative of a person's
actual real beliefs yeah sometimes
sometimes it's bored people that are
trying to fuck with people and they're
trying to get a rise out of folks and
they know that if they write a bunch of
n words and Heil Hitler
that it's gonna get a reaction and then
they'll check it every couple minutes to
see what kind of well I look at all
these people getting mad ha ha like this
is what happens so it's incredible
progressive team tends to when you think
of someone as being progressive or
having you know a progressive voice you
tend to think of being inclusive you
know not supporting homophobia being
open to all sorts of different
marginalized groups rights but when you
think of conservative you open the door
for a lot of people that are rejected by
these progressive groups and they might
not necessarily be conservative but they
are not welcome in these progressive
spaces so they come on to these new
places and it turns into a dumpster fire
yeah look the story you just described
is the story of cable television right
so the story of cable television is that
at a certain point people like Robert
Roger Ailes and the Murdock's decided
that we didn't have enough conservative
media out there and so they funded not
just magazines like the New Republic but
they funded the beginning of cable
television and and that created this
bifurcation in media with cable
television and you know one could make
these observations about
this is what you hide then Claire's book
is all about like what the nature of
truth is on cable television
on the right is different from what it
is on the left so I think that's all
fair and I don't think anybody has a
clear sense of what the right answer
look looks like in this space I mean the
reality is you know Facebook is a
technology I mean here the Facebook
friends are gonna really hate me for
this but here Facebook is a technology
to exploit insecurities for the purpose
of selling ads that's what it does what
it does is make you feel like you've
checked and you're like why didn't she
like that photograph or why isn't he
friended me and so you constantly engage
because you're constantly trying to feed
this you know feedback and that is
exploiting Tristana just on Harris's
work is really a powerful here it's
exploiting your insecurities is that
really what it is because I've always
thought about it as being a fast-food
version of the nutrients that we're
missing in an actual real community
that's so good that's exactly the right
way to think about it but just in the
same way that fast-food companies figure
out how to exploit the brain chemistry
that makes it so that you eat chicken
wings you know barbecue chicken wings
because they know that's what's going to
feed that kind of addiction and just
like gaming companies figure out how to
tweak the game so that they'd know how
to you know get the addiction out of
your kids this company is really great
about getting you to like turnover as
much as you can to them to build you
into this quote community why are they
doing that not because Mark Zuckerberg
has come some kind of freaky guy who
wants to know your secrets but because
the more you turn over to them the
better their ads are in feeding you
information so this is a technology for
the purpose of engendering advertising
and so that advertising gets really
really good and so you know you could
say that Facebook is tilted to the left
but the reality is there was an
extraordinary amount of exploitation of
the advertising inside of Facebook to
feed information to the right and it's
the last election I mean this is what
Kathleen Hall Jamieson about this is
really quite amazing and documenting and
that's because it's gotten really good
and being able to segment markets
on the basis of what people know or care
about it again not because anybody
planned it nobody wrote jew-hater but
because the AI is smart enough to figure
that out and so when you build this
technology that is driven to the purpose
of making it easier to sell ads you
produce this world that you know has no
necessary connection to figure people
figuring out what the truth is I didn't
think of cable television cable
television is about building really
loyal community building the tribal
sense of the community if telling the
truth did that they would tell the truth
if not telling the truth does that they
will not tell the truth the question is
not whether you're telling the truth or
not the question is what builds the
advertising base and so this this
reality that we have these platforms
that are ad driven um distort or
constructs drives that platform to
develop in certain ways and that's why I
think it's important to think well what
if we could create a competitive
environment where there were different
platforms available ones that were not
focused on you know driving ads and this
is something that I get I think probably
fund those well isn't that that the the
reason why something like Google or
Facebook has gotten so big is because
there's so much money behind it well two
things because they've been allowed to
get so big and because so much money but
who would stop them the antitrust
departments you know people the
antitrust Department would step in and
say Facebook you've become too
successful the way you're buying up
competitors is disturbing to us well but
again think of the difference in that
sentence you've become so successful
that's one sentence and what we want to
do in America is encourage companies to
become successful I believe in you know
innovators and markets working alright
that's really great but you've bought
your competitor is a separate statement
like you have a bunch of money because
the stock is so valuable because people
think you're the future of money but
then you turn and use that money to buy
competitors what are you putting up
Jamie what is that's the total number
they've spent in the last I think it was
seven years I saw the companies they
bought scroll back don't don't move
total cost of acquisitions
what is that twenty three trillion
dollars million billion twenty three
billion dollars more than the gross
domestic product of Fiji Zimbabwe and
Maldives combined 19 billion of that
for that one what's that really yeah 19
billion yeah holy saying anyway yeah so
but the point is when you're talking
about acquisitions you're not
necessarily talking about companies that
are succeeding because they're so good
right so you know when you say what are
the alternatives gonna look like it's a
really hard question but we have some of
it in real space like we understand NPR
has a different set of incentives from
Fox News we understand podcasts have a
different set of incentives from YouTube
videos right YouTube videos have a
different kind of constraint if you did
a three-hour YouTube video you would not
live in the same way that you get to
live in the context of podcasts but we
do do a three-hour YouTube video but it
doesn't get the success that it gets
because it's a three hour YouTube video
it's because people are committed to
your podcast I mean I know these guys I
can carry it around and like when you
get to a place where it sounds like it's
gonna be interesting to see what's on
the video then they flip up the video
but you know but you know the average
successful YouTube video you know if you
do a political YouTube video you're told
you can't be more than two and a half
minutes and you've lost people but the
point is the environments I don't
necessarily think that's correct
Jordan Peterson is doing a lot of really
long YouTube videos that are very
successful there does podcast yeah
there's some there's a hunger right now
for unedited thought and I mean not not
not edited and under the non censored in
terms of language but in terms of no one
influencing what you're saying so if you
decided to do a podcast or a thing on
YouTube and no one was leaning over your
shoulder with an agenda or a guideline
to follow there's a real hunger for that
because people feel like they're what
you describe about Facebook and cable
news that they're essentially just
trying to sell you things keep you on
the hook so they can profit from you
there's a real hunger for someone who's
not doing that right I agree this is why
I feel like there's got to be a market
for news in that regard right like an
actual unbiased uncensored truly
objective centrist news station well
again I think that's the slow democracy
movement that podcast feeds mmm you know
because the reality is if
you had a simple way to be watching in
every second of your two-hour three-hour
podcast what was working and what was
not it would be really hard for you to
resist
I would resist okay I wouldn't pay
attention that thing for power to you
I've already been faced with that before
people's like said to me you know how
well this is when people start tuning
I'm like throw that away yeah but you
know I know friends I want Chris Hayes
will tell you about you know life on
MSNBC where it's C that's because of
advertiser doll okay that's my my point
to weighted you know this is my whole
point about this platform this platform
is an advertising driven platform right
that fact steers it in a certain way yes
and I'm saying we need to build
alternative platforms which is what
you're building in the put in the
podcast it's not like advertising is not
important to your stuff of course you
start with you know talking about
certain products that help sponsor what
you're doing so it's not an anti market
it's all for market but the point is it
allows you to develop the content in a
way that's not micro managed by the
advertising dollar or them are the
market incentive and that's critically
important it's also other people's
incentive to get you to do things in a
way that they will feel they feel would
be more profitable so that everybody
gains I don't have those other people so
there's no one else so if I but if I've
done television shows before when you do
television shows before you will have
meetings with producers and they will
have notes they will tell you that this
is hurting our bottom line and this is
not good for that or we have to
emphasize more this or the network wants
that and it's really just about
accentuating your ability to make more
money right which is why we have to
build these alternatives that can
compete with the advertising driven
platforms well if you could get a really
entertaining news show on YouTube or I
mean I guess the Young Turks sort of
tried definitely but they lean so hard
left but but they attract an
extraordinary number of people yeah
that's good yeah but again I you know we
have this image of like news shows you
know of a version of Walter Cronkite
maybe that's not what it is maybe you
know The Colbert Report is a news show
right joke something who's someone is
mocking it as they're delivering you
them but they're giving you the
information
right look like someone who's objective
I would like someone who's really
objective who talks about the negative
applications of whatever law or bill
that's being discussed like what would
be bad for everyone what would be good
for Democrats Republicans poor people
rich people you don't get that there's
no version of that elbow right now every
version leans towards whatever platform
they're on whether it's Fox News or
MSNBC yeah I think not for a want of
trying I just think the world doesn't
support it but why but the world doesn't
support it because there's these people
are so tribal because they want to be
either on the Fox News camp or they want
to be in the and an MSNBC camp I really
feel like there's a lot of people that
just aren't being represented and folks
like me who just I want to know what
what is happening why is this the case
why is this leaning in this direction
what's the real motivation behind this
bill what's the real motivation behind
these actions yeah and and the question
is whether you're going to get it from a
single person who purports to be quote
objective or whether you're going to get
it from three or four people mmm the
greeting across these different
perspectives when I was a kid I was
obsessed with the Soviet Union and in
1982 I went to the Soviet Union I was
like I guess I was 20 just turned 21 and
and I was hitchhiking through Eastern
Europe and then I went through the
Soviet Union and I was on a train from
Leningrad to Moscow and sitting next to
a professor I always seemed to be
followed by people who spoke English but
this guy spoke English and he said to me
I'm you know we have a better system of
free speech in Soviet Union than you do
in America how dare he yeah so I said
what the hell could that possibly mean
and he said well when you wake up in the
morning this he said he said when you
wake up in the morning you read the New
York Times or The Washington Post The
Wall Street Journal and you think you
know the truth but we know when we read
our newspapers everybody's lying to us
so we have to read seven or eight
newspapers and triangulate on the truth
and that makes us a more critical free
speech Society than America
and you know it's kind of funny at the
time because like you realize they
didn't have any but there's a kernel of
truth to that you know when my dad gets
an email that says Barack Obama's a
Muslim he comes from the time when you
just believe what's printed even though
it's not printed it's just an email and
so he just kind of like oh my god the
president's a Muslim but you know my kid
gets an email that says Barack Obama's a
Muslim he's like yeah well I mean what
else I mean like he's gonna be like you
want to see yeah views and so I think
that in some sense we are producing a
culture especially among our kids or at
least one hopes where they recognize
that everything is partial yes and you
got it you got to do a lot of work to
home to knit it together and in the end
that might be a better I might be a
better ecology for producing democracy
and truth then one where you know you
got to trust the source to be quote
objective in this case that's an
interesting perspective I do definitely
agree that young people are more
skeptical and more aware of the
possibilities of fuckery today than ever
before
he's a funny story Michael Sherman you
know yeah Michael Shermer who is a
professional skeptic yeah I get a DM
from him says there's a story about you
on beasts what is the British BBC it's a
story about you on BBC you have to login
to your Twitter to read it so I look at
that I go what kind of bullshit list
would you get hacked so I sent him a
message say hey did you get hacked they
sent him the message and he said what
there's a story about me and he logged
in shit he's a fucking professional
skeptic Wow
they got him but why cuz he's older no
you know I mean I think guys that didn't
grow up with that they don't or they
don't know tricksters they don't know
the ways of and it was a nightmare for
him he like I mean his whole system was
screwed up
he had a every time make make it tweet
it would get deleted like it was really
bad I think mail him ago dude you got
hacked
no it's a problem with us old people
this is the way we lived well it's just
you grow up with one system and then all
sudden you know I don't know what to do
here oh it says it needs my login let me
just give me the Oh uh-huh and then all
these pop-up boxes and oh no the number
of people who are being tricked into
believing the IRS is calling them on the
telephone and demanding hilarious
hilarious and tragic I mean there's this
amazing man told me they're gonna put my
whole family in jail my whole family
they left a message since you did not
return our call we will put your whole
family in jail like damn my whole family
the dog to everybody cats it's like what
the fuck man like they're trying to
freak people out and it's you know an
automated voice message that's very
beautiful yeah yeah old folks get roped
into that stuff real hard it's very sad
it's very sad because a lot of them are
lonely and the you know they don't have
a lot of companionship and they get
these messages and they don't know who
to turn to to explain it to ya yeah and
you know so is there a reason to be
hopeful here well younger kids yeah and
the other thing that makes me really
hopeful is places like reddit you know
so which forums are you going to great
but many of them are great but the point
what the greatness can in here's and
they're demonstrating incredible talent
it's out there in the world that you
know in the 1970s just would have been
invisible like you kind of looked at the
world in the 1970s which I remember the
1970s you kind of thought there were
great people at the top you know they
are all in television and and everybody
else was kind of a troll mmm but what
read it does every day you know I I
obsessed with certain of these feeds
suggester amazing but um it's like you
read them like here's just some Joe
Schmoe out there that's taken a bunch of
data and data is beautiful and like
demonstrated something amazing by the
way he's built it and you get the sense
that the world is filled with these
incredibly talented smart people
everywhere who are you know many of them
just have too much time but the point is
they are out there everywhere
so if you ask why should we be hopeful
it's that we develop these critical
attitudes we have this ability to think
across and the army is filled with so
many incredibly talented people and the
internet surfaces it it makes it
possible for us to at least reach them
yes I and then the question is can we
use this power leverages power and
actually do something with the forces of
evil that now control I had an
interesting moment last night at the ice
house comedy club where there was a
drunk couple in the front row that were
talking really loud and they were
annoying all the people around them and
they were kind of chiming in and
heckling and raising their hands and
eventually they got kicked out and it
was pretty fun everybody was having a
good time it was pretty pretty crazy
even as they were getting kicked out the
rest of the audience was having a good
time because we were making fun of it
and I said as these people were getting
kicked out I said this is basically us
most of us are cool there's a hundred
and fifty people in here and out of the
hundred fifty people 148 of them are
having a great time everyone's drinking
and laughing and we're all these
comedians and no one wants any
extraordinary attention no one wants any
special attention but two people fucked
it up now if you were next to those
people you would say oh the crowd there
sucks the people are always yelling
things out and they're drunks and they
heckle well because that those two
people required an exorbitant amount of
attention they asked for more attention
than anyone else and if you use that by
a sample group and say well this is the
crowd the crowd is these drunk people
that yell do you know the vast majority
the crowd are really polite fun people
out having a good time and they
approached it with the perfect attitude
I think this is the world this is the
world I think the world is there's a
small percentage of people that fuck
things up for everybody and I think that
this this is in terms of politics in
terms of business in terms of everything
isn't that yes in terms of the net for
sure and I think the net is the perfect
example of that if you're a person that
gets if something happens to you and
people start attacking you online
or it if you just noticed the the number
of people like sayin you're involved in
some sort of a story right say maybe
there's a million people that know about
this story and you get a hundred and
fifty people send you mean things you
think it's the end of the world
yeah 150 people you you don't notice
that it's a hunt you just see all these
messages and it's on it's unmanageable
you're like oh my god everyone hates me
no a hundred and fifty people have
decided to take action and make you feel
bad because they feel bad it's a small
number in terms of the overall number of
human beings but if you are louis c.k
and it's coming at you you're like holy
shit the world fucking hates me you know
and it's it's this is this is the
situation that we're in right now is we
just have so many voices
it's incredible though because out of
all those voices as long as you're not
personally trying to figure it out and
filter it yourself with your own which
is completely impossible but if you
could just look at it objectively from
afar this is going to work itself out
and a far better way than has ever
happened before in our past there's
never been this many voices yeah and our
pastors been a so like you were talking
about a select few voices the Walter
Cronkite's the whoever it is on at the
top and then everyone else sort of had
to wait for the narrative to be spelled
out for them
right that's not the case anymore that's
right and and again I think it's the
best of times in the worst of times so
the best of times because all these new
voices are bringing all sorts of great
perspective and insight and intelligence
to the to the story that wasn't there
before and that's great the problem is
is if the infrastructure that used to be
there to kind of bring us all Paul bring
us all up to a kind of basic level so
that we understood the facts disappears
so we don't have anything that kind of
makes it so that we all understand
what's at issue and what's at stake and
what the facts are so that we can act as
a democracy in a sensible way then the
question is how do we run a democracy
you know because if we could have all
these different you know I like to think
about the difference between the culture
channel and the democracy channel so in
the culture channel this is the best of
times by orders of magnitude
yeah the stuff on television today is
a billion times better than anything
from the 1970s and 1980s yeah
and it's that's a product of this
incredible competition and the fact that
you can have anything and any niche
market and as long as it's enough it
makes sense to do it and that's what's
great but when you turn to the democracy
channel the same fragmentation the same
niche market the same reality of us all
living in these different universes
means we can't address problems as a
democracy with even the same facts and
that's a real problem because if we all
live in our own fact universe but we
have to same face the same real problems
in the same real earth then we're not
going to decide them in any sensible way
and how you solve that problem is really
hard like we're not going back thank God
we're not going back to the 1960s it's
just not going to be the case that there
are three channels we get to watch
that's just not gonna happen and and
it's a great thing because we've got all
this amazing culture but what do we do
on the democracy side how do we build a
democracy recognizing that everybody's
not going to spend all their time
geeking out about campaign finance
reform legislation and and that's why I
think we need to think about these other
ways to bring people to some sensible
understanding and you know Bryan Callen
and Hunter Matz were the first people
that brought me into this like they put
me on their podcast and I remember like
not even knowing when he did this like
the length of that conversation and
thinking what are you gonna cut this
down to like six minutes how long did
you guys talk we talked for an hour you
know and then we're already done two
hours and 15 minutes holy shit yeah
there's a time warp in this room Wow
I can see that yeah I mean but I
remember thinking like in the middle
like I stopped and I thought whoa this
is the this is the changing of the world
this is it as opposed to those panel
shows as three Talking Heads oh my god
like when you're on these cable
television shows and you've got 30
seconds to say something and and you
know you linked it before and I think
this is really the key it's it's it's
exactly like diet like we recognize that
we have been like put into a world right
now where we all eat shitty food because
it's been designed to make it so tasty
like we love it you know and the only
way we reform that
if individuals one-by-one begin to
decide to eat the right stuff right you
got to decide to engage in the right
kind of healthy behavior to to be able
to survive in this world because the
incentives of the market are to sell you
stuff that doesn't necessarily do that
it's the same thing with the information
space that's why the slow food movement
is like the slow democracy movement like
the slow food movement is how do you
produce food that's actually healthy in
a way that feeds you and you feed your
body and the right way I think the slow
democracy movement how do you feed a
democracy and and elements to that I've
got to be context where people are free
to get deeper than 30 seconds and if we
don't build more of those we're gonna
have a we're gonna have a really
desperate time for demcrata have what
we have which is the rise of
authoritarians around the world do you
foresee the possibility of alternative
social media outlets sort of viewing all
the issues that people do have with
Google or Facebook or Twitter and any of
these are perceived to be biased sources
of information and coming up with
something that has clear protections in
there sort of like the founding fathers
did when they'd established our system
of government that you listen we don't
want that let's let's organize that as
we're starting to make sure that this
doesn't doesn't ever turn into some sort
of an echo chamber yeah look I am it's
way above my pay grade yeah
but what I know gets us there is
competition I know that the only thing
that has ever gotten us to the next
great innovation is the enforcement of
competition which is why it's a problem
when someone like Facebook absolutely
buys in so what gave us the internet
yeah was interventions by the government
against AT&T which was the dominant
telecommunications company for more than
a century that finally said enough of
this you can't leverage your power to
control all innovation and once that
intervention happened people could layer
on top of their wires a new network
called the Internet yeah and when they
did that government said to companies
like cable tell
company's ok yeah you've got broadband
across your cable line but that doesn't
mean you get to decide what applications
go on that cable line so you your HP I
mean your the cable company you can't
say that there can't be Netflix on the
cable or you can't slow Netflix down no
obviously they would want a slow
nitpicks down because Netflix is a
competitor with their basic business
model but the intervention to assure
competition created the opportunity for
these great new innovations no nobody at
the beginning of that had any clue about
what would come out of it
all that they knew was that the only way
to get something new and great was to
assure competition and that's the
commitment we've given up since 2000
since George Bush became president 2001
there's been no major enforcement action
by the antitrust Department against any
of these companies and that is a huge
problem and until we rediscover the
importance of competition not because
we're geniuses and we can figure out
what the future will bring but because
we know from the past that the only way
the future comes is if you guarantee
competition unless we do that we're
never gonna solve any of these problems
yeah ensuring competition is ensuring
innovations ensuring and anybody who
doesn't want competition wants to stifle
innovation and it's got to be thought to
be a selfish proposition right and the
basic is so you know the basic argument
in competition law you know this
competition law got taken over by a
bunch of Chicago economists who said the
only question was efficiency or consumer
welfare but there's another perspective
that libertarians like Luigi Zingales
who's a an economist that you nourish a
Chicago Business School and and people
who are not libertarians like Tim Wu
who's a professor at Columbia embrace
and this is the idea of political
antitrust and the idea of political
antitrust is you should also worry if
companies are so big that they can
corrupt the government like this is a
dimension to worry about too because if
they get to be so big that they can
corrupt the government then you know
that they will use that power to protect
themselves against innovation because if
an innovator comes he doesn't come with
50 lobbyists he just comes with a great
idea
I mean you know Elon Musk saw this
dramatically as he's developing this
incredible alternative and tried to
figure out how to sell it inside of
states and then the lobbyists for the
car companies would go state-by-state
and forbid them from being able to sell
cars without a local dealership in the
state right there was a huge fight as
the incumbent industries leveraged their
power over government to protect
themselves from this new competitor and
this is the this is the fight we have to
we have to make central again because if
we don't do that then the dinosaurs will
have the power through this corrupted
political system to protect themselves
against the future and this is just the
moment when we need to figure out how to
make the future come I'm glad you're
raising these warning flags but I feel
like from talking to you that you're
fairly optimistic you're the first
person who's ever said that really
you're optimistic your perception of the
Internet and the young people coming up
and okay that's her the the the way
information is being distributed today
there's so many people participating in
it and there's so much competition even
in that forum right I mean there's yeah
there's more voices now and there's a
lot of look in the past when you had to
be selected in order to speak yeah it
was very difficult to get through that
selection process and it's not
necessarily the best voices that got
through it's just sometimes the most
persistent and the most influential
whatever the reason why they got to be
one of those people with the tie in that
block on those panel shows that's not
the case anymore right you know now
you've got kolinsky you've got all these
you know these these people that are
they don't necessarily fit in you know
any traditional jimmy dore they don't
fit in any traditional role on regular
mainstream television but they have a
pretty influential voice absolutely and
they're very politically savvy and
they're talking about things in a way
that they would be they would be it
would be very hard to get a producer to
sign off on the way a lot of these guys
communicate and some of the things that
they do it would be very very difficult
but so you're up to mystic - I'm very
optimist okay so I'm optimistic in that
space
you know everything outside of the
Beltway of Washington I'm optimistic
about I think America you know has an
incredible capacity to innovate out of
its problems what I fear and what I'm
not sure any rational person should be
optimistic about but you know that
doesn't mean you don't fight it what I
fear is Washington and and so I've said
many times that like the power of
corruption in Washington might be so
great that it cannot be defeated but
that doesn't affect what we should be
doing we should be fighting it whether
or not we think we can win like winning
is not the only reason you fight you
fight because it's the right thing to do
and we need to rally because we might be
wrong it could be it should just be that
if we got the political force we could
take them down and and I think that's
what we got to be setting up for right
now when you see people like Tulsi
Gabbard or will you see this the young
woman in New York Alexandria Acacio is
Ocasio Cortes that to me that's very
promising yeah that people are leaning
in this direction and that they're
they're saying let's just let's let's
look at this in a different way and
let's see some new voices yes let's hear
people that are clearly not influenced
by corporate America they're clearly not
they don't have all of their veins
hooked up to the matrix yet yeah no I
Tulsi I had known before your your
interview with her your interview with
her I think gave people a incredible
understanding of the depth of her soul
which is deep how about when she tweeted
to the president making us Saudi
Arabia's bitch is not putting us America
first so she can go she can both do the
deep and also the the shallow she can do
us that's amazing that is an
unprecedented thing too because what
Trump has done is like he's opened up
the door for this kind of very hostile
communication but what he's also done is
open up the door for it to come back at
him yeah yeah not that he notices but
you're right exactly the rest the world
notices though but I what I think is
interesting about Alexandria is she is
very disciplined about saying look we
got to fix the system if we're gonna get
any of these things done so I like to
think about like eggs and ER versus
Bernie you know so she like every time
she gets up there and talks about you
know her green
energy New Deal it's like you got to fix
the political system and then we're
gonna be able to get this stuff right as
opposed to like putting a list of ten
things you want to do without anywhere
even mentioning the fact that you're
gonna you know make these things
possible if I pick Singh fixing
political system I think we need new
people which this new Congress is filled
with them there were a hundred and seven
members of people running for Congress
who wrote to the Speaker of the House
and said they want as the first thing is
addressing of this corrupt political
system and Nancy Pelosi gave them not
just that but all these other reforms to
that's HR one the younger people coming
into Congress realized the system is
broken
I fear the older people in Congress have
gotten so used to the system that they
don't even notice anymore just how
bromine it is how outrageous it is and
they need to rage so they're gonna rage
against the billionaire's or whatever
but I think we need to focus the rage on
the problem and that problem is Congress
if we don't fix Congress first nothing
else matters nothing else will happen
and we need to build the movement which
I think could actually be a movement
that brings people on the right and
people on the left in to make that
change possible well that's the
philosophy that you have to have
darkness in order to inspire light and
that there's some sort of a balance to
be achieved in in this managing of those
two energies and that when you have an
administration that's clearly fucked up
and then people come along and say it's
time that I get into politics and make a
difference these are the people that are
motivated because they see a need for
change whereas you know some people with
other administration's like I like the
way things are going I'm gonna go pursue
the private sector I'm gonna go do this
I'm gonna do this people see something
like what's happening with Trump and
they say I want to I want to stop this
this is nothing like the America that I
know right there people entering
politics for the best possible yes and
and I think people on the right have
entered politics for the best possible
reason and people on the Left too
the question is how quickly do they get
bent by the system right how quickly do
they become part of the system the dark
side yeah that force because like when
you like you know when you say members
of Congress been you know spend 30 to 80
percent of their 70% of the time raising
money you might think that means they're
miserable most
but you know there's a way in which it's
actually psychologically rewarding for
them so um you know to be a member of
Congress right now is a pretty miserable
job you don't get much done like you're
spending all your time like rats in a
maze like the bell goes off you got to
run to the floor your aide tells you how
you're to vote you vote then you leave
from the floor it's nothing like what
the framers imagined like they were
sitting on the floor listening to debate
about ideas all that's bullshit the only
debate is debate to c-span it's like a
speech to c-span and and that's and
that's what it is so the life of a
congressman is pretty miserable but um
but when they fundraise it's kind of
like push-ups you know it's like they
sit down and they're told ok you got to
raise $20,000 and the aides sit there
and say call Joe he cares about this and
call Fred and he cares about that and
you go through and when you hit your
numbers it's like hey ray I did
something so like you feel like you're
accomplishing something but the point is
the psychology of that increasingly
makes you okay with the system that
you're in and you realize you win in
that system you've won on your own
system and so your openness to changing
the system becomes really sketchy so I
think the critical moment right now is
to is to solidify the recognition this
Congress is corrupted and we have to fix
it and you know the only thing I'm
worried about with HR 1 is that it's
going to make it into a democratic issue
it's like that Democrats care about it
so the Republicans are supposed to not
care about it the critical thing now is
to get Republicans to support the idea
of reform and then make it something
other than just a traditional tribal
fight between left and right are you
optimistic was I was that correct that
I'm optimistic about everything outside
of the Beltway and I'm gonna fight like
hell to prove that we can fix stuff
inside the beltway but if you told me I
had to bet on my son or daughter's life
I'm not going to tell you that I think
yeah I would never ask you to okay good
thank you for doing this I really
appreciate it I really enjoyed talking
to you let's do this again hopefully
you'll be right every time you ask all
right we'll do it thank you sir
appreciate it
[Music]
[Applause]